Solar System

The Solar System is the gravitationally bound system of the Sun and the objects that orbit it, either directly or indirectly. Of the objects that orbit the Sun directly, the largest are the eight planets, with the remainder being smaller objects, the dwarf planets and small Solar System bodies. Of the objects that orbit the Sun indirectly—the natural satellites—two are larger than the smallest planet, Mercury.

The Solar System formed 4.6 billion years ago from the gravitational collapse of a giant interstellar molecular cloud. The vast majority of the system's mass is in the Sun, with the majority of the remaining mass contained in Jupiter. 

The four smaller inner system planets, Mercury, Venus, Earth and Mars, are terrestrial planets, being primarily composed of rock and metal. 

The four outer system planets are giant planets, being substantially more massive than the terrestrials. The two largest planets, Jupiter and Saturn, are gas giants, being composed mainly of hydrogen and helium; the two outermost planets, Uranus and Neptune, are ice giants, being composed mostly of substances with relatively high melting points compared with hydrogen and helium, called volatiles, such as water, ammonia and methane. 

All eight planets have almost circular orbits that lie within a nearly flat disc called the ecliptic. 


Planets

Inner Planets

Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars

Distance from Sun

Mercury: 0.4 AU
Venus: 0.7 AU
Earth: 1 AU
Mars: 1.5 AU


Asteroid Belt

Asteroids except for the largest, Ceres, are classified as small Solar System bodies and are composed mainly of refractory rocky and metallic minerals, with some ice. They range from a few metres to hundreds of kilometres in size. Asteroids smaller than one meter are usually called meteoroids and micrometeoroids (grain-sized), depending on different, somewhat arbitrary definitions. 


Outer Planets

Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune

Jupiter's Largest Moons

Ganymede
Castillo
Io
Europa


Saturn's Rings

Cassini Division Structures
Huygens Gap, 117,680km (distance from center), 285-400km (width), Christiaan Huygens (named after)
Huygens Ringlet, 117,848km, 17km, Christiaan Huygens
Herschel Gap, 118,234km, 102km, William Herschel
Russell Gap, 118,614km, 33km, Henry Norris Russell